 Would you like me to explain cloud computing in about 10 minutes? I'm going to give it a try. So welcome back to the cloud computing insider where we talk about the realities of cloud computing and how to make it work for your enterprise. My name is Dave Lentkheim author speaker, Beela Skik. Let's get to work. So this came from a number of you that wanted more of an introduction to cloud computing. And I guess that's true. I mean, cloud computing has been around for a long time, but not everybody understands what it is. And even if you do understand what it is, maybe it's a good idea to normalize your thinking around what this technology does, what it's capable of capable of doing and why you should be looking at it or even not looking at it. I think that's just as important. So I decided to put together this video where I'm going to explain things in about 10 minutes. So let's see how I do. So first kind of the history of cloud computing, because I think it's kind of interesting, it came out of the 60s actually. The first time cloud computing was named. And I used to see it throughout my career, certainly in the 80s, where people would talk about the cloud normally around, you know, deck based networks, things like that. And it was just, you know, but one of those buzzwords that was being over applied to lots of different things. And of course, we had time sharing services, you know, since the since the 60s, it's not something new. We're leveraging somebody else's infrastructure. You know, indeed, I work for Boeing computer services, which was a time sharing service, you know, back in 1985 for a couple of years, which I guess was the early predecessor to cloud computing. And of course, time went by and over time, we saw the emergence of the internet and people kind of asking the questions, is it good? Is it a good idea to consume applications over the open internet? And we had the application service providers that started to rise up and that became kind of a thing in the late 90s. And that was kind of the predecessor cloud computing. And here we are. So the simple definition of cloud computing is using somebody else's computer or servers over the internet. I think that's applicable. You got to remember, it's a consumption model. We're consuming the same resources we did on premise, but doing so over the open internet and doing so through a rental arrangement. In other words, leveraging a service provider to provide these services. And we agree to pay the money. And it's different than traditional computing, just basically with the consumption type premises. Normally, these things are multi-tenant. They have to support number of clients that are accessing these resources at the same time. And as a tenant to these services, we treat them as any other utilities. Almost like you treat your power company or water company. In other words, you're using resources from those particular entities, and you're paying for those resources that you use. And this becomes something that's really kind of no different. So the characteristics would be remote access. In other words, we're accessing this stuff through a remote network. Typically, it's going to be the internet, but it doesn't have to be. It can be a private circuit that goes directly into another service provider. And the services available on demand. In other words, we're able to provision the things as we need them. Normally, without human intervention, we're not having to call a salesperson up to allocate storage resources, and compute resources. We just go to a cloud provider and allocate them. And we have flexibility and resource sharing. In other words, we're able to get what we need as we need it for whatever purposes. And that's the beauty of cloud computing. And that brings us with the agility benefit of it and the ability to scale. Because as we need these resources instead of going down to the computer store to buy servers and bringing them back to the data center and bolting them into the racks, we just press a button with a credit card and those services are allocated to us. So of course, when cloud computing started to emerge as a thing, the industry defined its aspects. And certainly the government did as well. NIST has the definition of cloud computing that everybody typically uses more or less. It was developed in 2008, 2009. I actually helped participate in that, which was kind of interesting to see people converge on particular semantics, which is what it is. But what are the key types of cloud computing? Well, we have public clouds, such as AWS, Google Cloud, Microsoft Azure, and they're accessible to everybody. So in other words, if they're a public service, and if you want to go become a customer, you can in a very short period of time, as long as you're able to give them a credit card or some way that they can bill you for those services. Private clouds are typically custom infrastructure that's designed for a single company. So it adopts what public cloud computing is and tries to replicate it in a private cloud space that exists just within the data center that serves only one particular organization and does so typically through a private network. And we have hybrid cloud, which is basically paired use of public and private clouds. Sometimes hybrid cloud also includes just traditional systems and public clouds. So it's very flexibly defined. And people would leverage that for security and scalability, you know, get the best of private cloud and public cloud. And that's hybrid cloud. And then of course, there's multi cloud, which is a mix of public clouds, private clouds, and traditional systems. And it's kind of everything else. And this is what typically people are using today. In other words, using more than one cloud brand, AWS Microsoft or Google or one of the other cloud players, they may be using traditional systems and private clouds. And the complex architecture that is that is typically going to be called multi cloud. So how is the industry defining the core cloud services? The three major categories, which still are the way it's defined today, would be infrastructures of service or IAS or IAAAS and their virtual machine servers, storage like AWS, ec2, which provides things that we would normally find within a data center storage and compute servers that are able to be leveraged over the open internet. In other words, they're replicating traditional data center services that we're using these things as resources, but we're doing so by using somebody else's resources. And that would be infrastructure as a service. Platform as a service, you don't hear that much about today. And those are tools for developers to build applications. Google App Engine was early money into that long time ago, certainly in the late 2000s, and getting these things up and running. And the whole idea there was to provide a turnkey application development deployment and operating environment directly on a single platform. Of course, a lot of those things have been adopted by the traditional infrastructures, the service providers like AWS, Microsoft and Google. So you don't hear a lot about that these days since they have a tendency to exist in the infrastructures of service cloud. And then finally, the oldest form of cloud computing, as I mentioned, we started off with the application service providers, would be software as a service, which is full application provided over the open internet. So instead of accessing an application on your PC, you're accessing it through a web browser, accessing it on the man through a remote service like Salesforce.com was obviously the poster child of software as a service system. So we have Gmail. We have often a automation systems such as Office 365. All of those things qualify as software as a service system. And if you're saying there seems to be some shared under some shared ideas and concepts between those platforms, absolutely. So in other words, platforms as a service has been incorporated by infrastructures as a service and certainly software as a service is incorporated infrastructures as a service capabilities. Certainly we look at the AI capabilities that are out there today. So it's not as cut and dry as you would think it is. But if you understand infrastructure as a service platform as a service, software as a service and what they are and the rudimentary understanding of those concepts, you kind of got it. So why is cloud computing so popular? Hopefully for watching this channel, you've understood that. But if you don't, it's because convenience and accessibility. It's much more convenient for us to leverage a cloud platform than it is, assembling our own physical hardware within our particular data center. Take AI for instance, which is obviously all the rage these days. It's going to be much easier for us to leverage an AI ecosystem out of a cloud provider like AWS Microsoft or Google than it is to replicate that in our data centers unto itself, buying the hardware, buying the software, installing it, getting the security infrastructure in place, going to be hard for the rank and file, you know, IT person to do. And they're able to provide a lot of that stuff on demand, which is convenient, accessible, normally the path of least resistance if we're trying to get to utilization of resources. Cost efficiency, typically you pay for only what you use. That doesn't mean cloud is always cost efficient. As we talked about on the show a lot of times, they can a lot of cost overruns and cloud computing oftentimes is more expensive than people think. Scaleability, easy increase or decrease resources is needed. So we're able to allocate the resources, only pay for what we use and deallocate them and reduce our spending. And that's convenient for many enterprises. Certainly enterprises that are seeing seasonal demands such as retail organizations and security and backups. In other words, security is held on demand. They're able to provide some basic business continuity disaster recovery capabilities that are built in the cloud. And we're able to leverage those services, including governance and operation systems, which comes out of the cloud as a native cloud service. And that becomes a path of least resistance or the most convenient way to leverage those things as well. So that's why people leverage cloud computing. Typically not the cost advantage, but because of the convenience, scalability and the path of least resistance to getting these resources up and running. So what about concerns about cloud computing? Things aren't always that great. We talked about the advantages, but the concerns would be privacy and security of data. Obviously, in many instances, we're trusting another entity to store and maintain our data. And many companies won't do that. So in other words, they may do some rudimentary data storage and rudimentary application development and deployment in public cloud providers, but they won't put the crown jewels up there. And so they're concerned about the privacy and security of data, data being shared data being access, because the data is out of your physical control. Dependence on fast and reliable internet connection. You have to remember, we're using this typically over the open internet. We have to have a very reliable internet connection to make these things happen. So if you're disconnected from the internet or you have a slow and unreliable internet connection, you could you could find that an issue as well as unsecured internet connections using something in an internet cafe. They may have the capability of viewing your data. Down time risk of the cloud service goes offline. We haven't seen a ton of this, but they do go down. And obviously they can stop your business and running. And we've seen businesses that are halted for a few days at a time, because the cloud providers go down. Now you have to contrast this with the reliability of the traditional on-premise systems and how reliable they are. I would view the cloud typically as a more reliable resource than that, but they do go down. They do go offline and you're at the mercy of them. So really the key points of this is cloud computing is dealing with technology that we've had around for a long time. Storage compute, AI systems, applications, you know, all these things that we're able to run on premise or on our desktops, but we're just doing it through a different consumption model. We're doing it as a service and consuming it over the open internet. And that provides us with the capability of having more convenient access to these resources than if we have to buy and set up and maintain our own physical hardware. So that should be the key point that you take away from this. So cloud computing, obviously very important. It's growing like crazy, normally around the AI movement. Lots of people jumped into cloud. Probably for the wrong reasons made some mistakes. And now we see some repatriation that's going on and those more of a tactical movement of cloud-based resources backed on-prem. And we're going to see more of that moving forward, but we're also seeing the huge growth in cloud computing, typically around AI consumption. Because again, it's going to be the path of least resistance to setting up an AI ecosystem out there. So it has its advantages and it's disadvantages. And I think you need to look at both. And obviously in the show, we're setting up to look at the realities of cloud computing and how this stuff should be working for your enterprise. Also, if you want to take a more in-depth course, I do have my LinkedIn learning course on core cloud computing concepts. The links down in the description below if you want to check that out. That's for the last 10 years been the most popular course out in LinkedIn learning in terms of people looking at learning just the core concepts. That's cloud computing 101. Take about an hour to kind of walk you through the ins and outs of cloud computing. Obviously a bit more in depth than we can go into here. And if you're looking for more education, I recommend that you check that out. Well, that's all I have for you this week. A bit of different stuff. Obviously moving back into the basics. Let me know in the comments below if you want more of this. I'm happy to do other things. Cloud 101, get deeper dive in infrastructures of service, platform as a service, deeper dive in a cloud-based AI. Starting at the root of the entry concepts and working up. In other words, a teaching show. Happy to provide those as well. And we're going to continue talking about more in-depth topics in cloud computing here as well for you people who are more advanced or looking to kind of take your stuff to the next level and looking for secrets and how that stuff is going to be working. Don't forget to check out my info world long. Don't forget to check out my course out on Go Cloud careers. Generative AI, Generative AI architecture course out on there. Obviously lots of courses like 70 plus courses on LinkedIn learning. Check them out there. You like the sound of my voice. You can certainly get a lot of it there. And so don't forget my book, Insiders Guide to Cloud Computing. Check that out as well. It's good read for about 20 bucks. So until next time, you guys stay very safe. Take care. Cheers.